We're talking for two years.
And this, of course, is second-hand, but I understand whether he said, no, you are all too white, you are all too heterosexual, whereupon I understand that wonderful James Chafee said, how do you know?
That's funny.
That's lovely.
That's a funny line.
Anyway... But you were fine to be on this committee.
I just put the tape on after you... Well, yes.
It was an advisory, a citizen's advisory committee.
Yes, yes.
And I felt I was very well credentialed, seeing as I...
you know, had not graduated high school and had become a writer.
And it says on my book, Jack, as you know, public libraries were her college, although I did have other kinds of colleges, too.
And that I, and that my book silences some of the material in that.
I read from the San Francisco Public Library.
which, of course, was my major source.
That chapter on literacy, for instance, where did you find out Sojourner Truth and Harriet Tubman, you know, couldn't read or come you and Dreiser?
I read.
Well, they had the books in the library.
Then, of course, I must say that in 1980,
62 when my life changed, and I had two years in Cambridge when I was at the old Radcliffe, now the Bunding Institute, and I had time in a way I'd never had before, and I had my own little place in this little yellow house where the first headquarters were.
It was just a couple blocks from
And not only Wiedner, there was Houghton that I had access to, and it was before the days they had all of that security.
And this is rather beside the point, but I had the great joy of meeting Theodore Ward, who was the only person who could read Emily Dickinson's handwriting.
She was the granddaughter of the Hollands, who were very close friends of Dickinson's and had a lot of the letters, and she never got credit while accepting a certain thanks at the time that the poems came out, which she had put in the life-telling order, but she did get credit when the letters came out, that is, she had a whole chapter on the, but it was still
The Harvard professor was the editor of it, you know, instead of all the work Theodora did.
But she brought me into the Emily Dickinson room, and after that I had carte blanche.
And I would just come in and, you know, open the drawers and see.
It was a period before all that security.
Well, isn't that Dickinson stuff they have at Harvard unbelievable?
The Keats material is...
Well, I never got to the Keats material.
But anyway, and then, too, BPL, Boston Public Library, was marvelous.
And then I absolutely loved the Cambridge Public Library.
And they have this wonderful Thomas Wentworth Higginson selection.
Yes.
And that was where I ran across the real Thomas Wentworth Higginson that most people now, they only know that he didn't instantly see to it that Emily Dickinson was published in there.
Actually, he was, I think he spelt her.
I think he was an impediment to her, I think.
Oh, no.
Not at all.
He was her great encourager.
The very fact that after his first letter to her, he wrote her immediately.
He wrote her that second letter in which he gave a real tribute to her poetry, and he kept in touch with her all of his busy life.
Listen, who would publish that kind of poetry at that time?
I should show you Brian's Treasury of American Poetry.
which was put out at about that time.
She was her own kind of a person, but he appreciated her poetry.
Don't forget that she wrote to him all of her life, and he wrote to her, and he wrote to her, and he was the person who was asked to come and give the eulogy for her.
And he's the person who, as soon as he saw those letters,
He said these have to be published, and was responsible for it.
No, and you know, he was a great man in his time, because he was so well-known in so many respects in the first place, and I never even knew that it was he, because the earliest Atlantic, I don't know if you read my Afterward to Life in the Iron Mills,
It's in silences.
Uh-huh, yes.
Uh-huh.
Well, you remember there's a footnote there.
By the way, it's one of the references.
It's right after the... Well, it's one of the references to the public library here, because it tells how it was that I found out... Where is... Just a second.
Let's just...
But that's good.
This is what I want to talk about, by the way, and who have been made by the books that they've read.
Also, well, at that time, it was open stacks.
Now, of course, certain stacks.
So much is not open.
But I used to be just amazed.
Here were these...
abolitionist-bound, skinny-bound volumes of one of their publications that had been put out in something like 1811, right on the shelves there.
And I'd never seen a book that old.
But... It's...
I think it should be somewhere in here that I say about my problem in finding out who she was, because now I'm speaking about Rebecca Harding-David, and I found the reference to her in a letter from Emily Dickinson to Susan,
asking her to please return the copy of The Atlantic that had Life in the Iron Mills in it.
And that was how come I found out in the footnote that it was written by Rebecca Harding Davis.
Because they did not, in those original Atlantics, have somebody's name.
Now, I recognized what I thought was thorough,
But I didn't know that it was he writing about Emerson until later on when I read Anna Farrow.
And then the fact that I couldn't, that actually we were too poor and had too many kids, and the library was wonderful anyway, that there weren't many books I could buy.
Let me interrupt for a second.
Can you give me just what you said you were born?
Can you just tell me where you were born and brought up?
All right.
Give me a little bit of the background.
Well, all right.
You've got time.
I've got time.
Well, I was born near Meade, Nebraska.
Mm-hmm.
in a little part of it that was called, I'm Told, though when I went to Meade, nobody remembered that, but I didn't talk to anybody, very old hogwash, or maybe this was just one of those legendary stories.
While my parents were immigrants.
From where?
They were from the Ukraine in the old Russia, czarist Russia.
My dad met my mother in the underground revolutionary movement, and my dad was the state secretary of the Socialist Party.
Really?
What was your father's name?
What?
Samuel Lerner.
There's a lot of material about this past stuff, but anyhow.
And then we moved from the farm to...
Omaha, and we moved first in the slaughterhouse section, and then we moved into what's called then North 24th Street, Omaha.
That was, I can't think of a more wonderful neighborhood to grow up in.
It was, I mean, our neighbors on both sides
were, in those days, out of respect, we probably would have said color.
That was before it began.
You said Negro, and, you know, and then you went through the different things.
And there were Sodders, that is, older people who'd been real pioneers and had come to the city to live late in, you know.
Of course, to me, they seemed so old.
There were Civil War vets.
There were men and women who'd been slaves as kids.
You have to remember how old I am.
It sounds... How old are you?
You didn't... Well, I am 85, and I have... Well, you're not 85.
Yes, I am.
Well, I was born in 1912.
January 14th, 1912.
You look absolutely... That's the biggest shock of the whole trip so far.
Well... Congratulations.
Congratulations.
You're doing something absolutely right, whatever that is.
Well, I look like I look.
And so this is how my age looks, too.
Wow.
Right?
Listen, my father's 86.
He looks wonderful.
All right.
His hearing is terrible, but his mind is good.
Well, my hearing, although I'm deaf in this ear, and I sometimes wear a hearing aid,
I always wear it when I go to commission meetings, and I turn it on as somebody's talking into the microphone with their back to me, and they have a soft voice.
Then I turn it up so I don't miss anything, but ordinarily I don't need a hearing aid, and my eyes are good.
I have glasses for long distance.
I have a problem with...
Before my car died, that was the reason that I got them, were for driving.
So you don't need glasses to read?
No, I don't need glasses to read.
I'm still looking for where it was that I paid that car that's one of the tributes to the library.
I love this book, by the way, so you don't need that.
Well, it's the book written by a reader.
and it came out of reading.
And I must tell you that out of the luck of my kind of reading at a certain historic moment, my kind of reading turned out to be very useful because there came a time when all of a sudden there was interest in more than what used to be called the canons.
Now, part of my luck, see, I didn't tell you about my luck in Omaha besides my wonderful neighborhood that was such an education and the fact I stutter, which you haven't noticed, but I do sometimes stutter.
It's not as bad as I was when I was growing up, so I was quiet a lot.
And I listened.
Well, I haven't done much stuttering with you.
There are times when I probably will, but there are times when I do much more of it.
Though I'm, you know, I get up and I speak, and then I seldom stutter.
But anyhow, to try to make this fast, part of my luck, my great luck when it comes to books, was that my folks did urges to take out library cards.
And I used to read books.
It was summertime, and this was after apples.
We actually had an apple tree in our backyard.
I loved the apple seeds.
I still do.
And I would eat the inside, and then I would spit that part into the books.
Well...
The librarian at the Great Omaha Public Library, which, by the way, was that and a certain great movie house, were my two first intimations of grandeur.
This library was really magnificent.
It was one of the old Carnegie libraries.
Well, there's a new library now, because I was just back again in Nebraska this last fall.
And I went to the new library to look at it, but the old library crowned the hill like my classical high school did, but this was before I'd gotten to high school.
Now, this librarian, she saw I loved reading books, and she explained to me how you should treat a book, and she said,
see why she didn't take away my card.
She didn't make me feel like I just expurgated my language, like dirt, because already I had some class sense, and I was very sensitive about shaming.
She took and she showed me, this is a tribute to librarians now that I think of it, and their particular sensitivity.
because so many children's books were such beautiful books, the illustrations in them, those colored illustrations.
And she took Robert Louis Stevenson's Child Garden of Verses that had somebody who'd done a wonderful, wonderful series of illustrations.
And she urged me, although it was a book that was hard for me, she thought,
were to take out Peter Pan that had, you know, these, so imaginative, you know, nothing to do with my life.
And then I'm trying to remember the name of that book about this rich girl who something happens and she becomes the poor abused girl.
It's a famous kid's book.
I'm trying to remember the name of it.
Well, it'll probably occur to me.
after a while, so that was part of my luck.
Now, this gorgeous library, it had stairs that went to the upstairs part.
In the landing, where you could see it from downstairs, was a huge picture of Willa Cather, a painting of Willa Cather, and I didn't know who she was at the time, though I had asked,
But then as I began to read more, I began to read her too, though I read her poetry first before I got into the fiction.
I didn't know she was a poet.
Yes, oh yes.
There's one volume of her verse, and people would not recognize some of it, whether it's a kind of love poem that she writes to a cowboy in it.
Anyway, so, and then I had a very wonderful first grade teacher, Ms.
Metz, who also... Metz, M-E-T-Z.
M-E-T-Z.
She wore those striped shirtwaists, and she, well, again,
And I think when I was thinking of writers who've been so affected by books, the number of them who was a librarian, I mean a teacher, you know, who got them to read or to go to the library.
Anyway, as I said, I had great luck there in Omaha, and then I crossed the tracks
I was part of the first generation of the unwashed horde that was invading the high school that crowned the same hill where the library was, Omaha Central High, where the grandchildren of the Cody's, Buffalo Bill, and the Dow's, and the Fonda's, and various other, you know, they'd been...
Some of them themselves had been sent east to prep school, and there was the attitude that Nebraska was the Wild West, and they hated it, and the kind of ribbing they had, and so they did everything to see to it.
This was a real classical high school, and you had to learn Latin, and preferably Greek as well, and there were statues in the hall.
Those statues are still there.
The high school is still there.
And it's still evidently considered to be just as good a college prep school as anything else.
I heard the latest about this because I couldn't tell just by going back to visit, which I always do when I go to Omaha.
But there was this young man at Stanford.
I go every single year.
And I speak to a group of freshmen.
The last book in a special course they have is only a riddle.
And so he spoke up very, very, very early and informed me that we were both graduates of the same high school.
But I had a remarkable English teacher who, in spite of the fact, and I realized
years later how I must have violated.
She was a true lady.
She was one of those who'd had a good education, but unlike others in her family, the man, the place for her to teach was in high school.
And we had classic English, about
This is one of the few books I have from childhood.
And it's a pretty messed up book.
Wow.
You still have this book.
I don't think the tape picked that up.
This is a book from your childhood.
And look at it.
The spine is gone.
It's been read to death.
Well, it was a very secondhand book.
And I don't know.
Look at all the pieces of paper in there.
Well, I'll tell you.
You see, this is Upton Sinclair's The Cry for Justice.
And this came from the Vineyard Shore School for Women Workers in Industry originally, I guess.
And I don't know how it ever got to Omaha.
But you see, you of course know who this is.
This is the man with the hole.
I would look up what else Keats or Shelley or Byron, especially Shelley and Byron were writing at the time that we did not have in our English class.
And I was really troubled for my wonderful English teacher, who was really very exceptional.
And you had this book for how long?
Oh, well, my dad had it originally.
And, you know, when I noticed that it was there, or how it got to my dad, I don't know.
Oh, it was written in there?
Well, when you wrote your book about collectors, and I thought of all those guys who had that money and knew about first editions and beautiful volumes and having complete sets of everything, and I thought about the kind of book collecting that, for instance...
I, in a very untutored way, did, which had nothing to do with the look of the book.
Of course, you had some book collectors they didn't care about.
They didn't give a damn about it.
Anyway, we wrote on prose rhythms and Thomas De Quincey, for instance.
It was really what
a very good college education in English literature.
We didn't have anybody American except for some of Emerson's essays.
I'm just taking some notes.
What?
Well, of course.
I'm going to try to get the University of California to reissue that book in their California series,
I just did a long afterword to a book called Bright Web of Darkness that's coming out in November, and so I know some of the people there.
And this is a California book, although it's international and what it has in it and all that, but it was Jack London, who by the way was one of those
It was out of the library that he read, because he did not have much education.
I'm like taking all of this down.
But London also was formed by what he read in the library on his own.
Yes, of course, plus his own life, plus the kind of oral things that he heard.
Things like the face on the barroom floor were very, very, I mean, reciting poetry.
I mean, when I, when I, and it began when I was a child, and I would go to the black church around the corner, I was so fascinated when they would have the, by the recitations.
And I would hear memorized poems.
all kinds of poetry, all kinds of language.
I do, and it should have been in the footnotes in my book, you know, in my fiction book, Oh Yes, I don't know if you read Oh Yes.
Not yet, I will.
Well, a lot of that language came out of what I heard.
I mean, there's something called Alva's, it's not called that, but it's Alva's dream in that.
And that goes back to the richness of my childhood.
I'll give you something before you leave.
By the way, Earlist Gaines is somebody else.
I know his work, right?
You know, Pulitzer Prize winner, and so forth and so on.
But he came out of—he didn't go to San Francisco State except briefly, and this was after he'd been in the Navy.
He was already a reader, but he got a lot of his passion for language, of course, out of the church.
Um, and here's Robert Haas in here.
There's, uh... No, this is, what is this magazine?
This is, um, they selected, um, 20... This is Stanford, isn't it?
Stanford, yes.
And, uh, Stanford, as well as the Berg, has got, uh, you know... They did a marvelous exhibition.
The New York Public Library did a marvelous exhibition very, quite recently on, uh,
manuscripts, I don't know if you saw it, in New York?
Well, I always go when I'm in New York, and you know why that I'm in the Berg.
I know that.
I was so thrilled when, when Mova Zloditz asked me that I immediately, she asked me for the makings of Yonandio since a lot more have turned up.
Here's the, here are the writers.
I see.
And there are two of us women.
Scott Turo was my pupil at, uh,
Scott Turow studied under you.
Well, at Amherst.
Mm-hmm.
He was writing very different things then.
Tobias Wolfe, of course.
Yes.
Uh-huh.
Philip Levine.
Yes.
This is quite a... Mm-hmm.
Wow.
This was published by Stanford University?
Yes.
Uh-huh.
Wonderful.
Bill McFerrin.
He is a love.
He is a real...
lover of uh when was this published you know uh well it was well this was published see why why they had an exhibit for the 100th anniversary uh well i think it was in 1989 where he tells about the quake here that happened afterwards you see why they had they why they had this exhibit for the two months for their 100th year anniversary and uh
But anyhow, nothing was heard.
But in this, I tell about my making and also how important that time, even if I was
I'm sure I can get a copy of this.
If you give me your address, I will mail you one if I don't lay my hands on it right away.
I know you have many other things to do.
Anyhow, I was very fortunate in my high school and the fact that we had to go back to reading.
Am I telling you what you'd like to hear?
Yes, very much.
All right.
We had one hour period
There was supposed to be a study period, and we could go to the library.
Well, I didn't do much of my homework, and I really needed to because I was working after school.
I didn't have time, you know, or time at home.
So, anyhow, so I read.
And then, too, I'd been determined I was going to read everything,
everything I cared to read in the Omaha Public Library.
And I would try to get down there, and young people don't need that much sleep.
Anyhow, but then I began to want to have some books, and that's when I discovered
It would always be outside in these bins, not in shelves, but in bins outside of one of the secondhand bookstores.
And they all were, well, they were like my copy of Life in the Iron Mills, which was that old Atlantic, where I didn't know who published what, because in that year they did not have people's last names.
So that's, oh, that's what started I talking about.
Thomas Wentworth Higginson, that great American.
And by the way, why do you know who John Brown wanted to come down and get his wife and kids and bring them up to Concord and so forth and so on?
And you know about who found out.
Well, I learned some of this from the Cambridge Public Library.
You better not get me started there.
But the wonderful value of going to places
And this was, you know, in the archives that they had about him.
But how it was he found out about Nat Turner, who he had not been able to get any information on, you know, in the contemporary newspapers.
Everything had disappeared.
And Thomas Wentworth Higginson came from a family that not only had Southern relatives, but, you know, it was a highly educated Harvard family, all of that stuff.
He's the same man, by the way, who married Lucy Stone and suddenly forgotten, you know, the one who had all the sisters.
Well, anyhow, I'm digressing, but to get back to my own life.
So I would try, fortunately, bookstores would be open on Sunday sometimes as well as Saturday sometimes.
I would try to poke around and see what I could pick up for a nickel or a dime or sometimes fisking cents or sometimes a quarter, and I began to acquire a few books of my very, very, very own.
But I was fortunate in having access to those two libraries.
And then I worked as a mother's helper where I lived, except on weekends.
And they were very educated people and had a wonderful library, but it was all...
modern fiction.
And they subscribed, I can't think of the name of that magazine, it had held drawings in it.
When you were getting these secondhand books, was there a specific focus, were there specific kinds of books, or just all kinds of books?
No, no.
It looked interesting to me.
Well, it was like my browsing reading, although if I fell in love with somebody,
I tried to read everything that they had ever written, and I never read biographies or autobiographies, except I did read one of Lafcadio Hearn, who was one of the people I fell in love with.
Interesting question.
What?
He's a fascinating person.
He's a fascinating person, and I loved why the books that they had, you know, glutes of unfamiliar Japan, and I loved the description
of him as this—because he was myopic and couldn't see well, and because he was so slight and small, the Japanese accepted him as one of their own.
Of course, he troubled to learn languages right away, unlike most—well, not that he was really born an American, you know.
He had a mixed heritage and all that.
Yes, well, I read everything of his that I could lay my hands on.
When I fell in love with Catherine Mansfield through her journal, then I began to look for journals as well, but I read everything of hers that I could lay my hands on.
How old were you at this particular time?
Oh, I was 15, 16, 17.
My own diaries that have some of my comments on my reading...
are down at Stanford.
So between my English classes till I got thrown out by my English, my beloved English teacher, I started to tell you how I used to wipe my nose on my sleeve.
It was the day before Kleenex was invented, you know, among other things.
And I would often...
forget my slender books and so forth and so on, but I really loved that teacher so much, but it was very mixed, and I would sometimes be embarrassed by how passionate but controlled she'd be in talking about the books we were going to read, and this was the year
that we were going to read all of Shakespeare.
And fortunately, there were slender books, not the poetry, but the plays.
And each book was a slender book.
And we had Macbeth.
Not Macbeth.
We already had had Macbeth.
We had Hamlet.
And she gave this perfect lecture.
She really should have been teaching in college.
And it was about the perfect way that all the plays were constructed, and how there was never, he never slipped up, there was never any kind of a contradiction, and I'm making saying it very, very fast.
So I raised my hand, and I said, well, how is it then that...
There he gives that famous speech about to be or not to be and that undiscovered born from which no traveler returns.
And he's just been talking to his dead father.
Well, if I thought about it, I would have realized this was in a dream and so forth and so on.
And we have dreams and all kinds of things happen in dreams.
She'd never thought of that.
And she looked at me and looked at me.
And she lost her cool, probably the only time she ever had.
I feel terrible about it to this day, especially after I went to the Historical Society, time before last I was in Omaha, and learned that they were having an exhibit about her.
She was a very famous English teacher.
Miss Mix.
She produced all kinds of students who wrote and all that.
Do you remember her first name, Miss Mix?
Yes, Sarah Vore Taylor.
Sarah?
And I contributed my old style book that she put out and had given to all of her pupils.
And before I got my first honorary degree, the night before, they had a dinner for the other people who were getting honorary degrees and some of the faculty at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln.
And it was surprising how many of them had had Sarah Vora Taylor.
And we got to talking about her.
She really was extraordinary.
But anyhow.
So you said she lost her cool.
What did she say?
Well, by the way, I discovered at that time I went to the Omaha, Douglas County Historical Society, this exhibit about her, that that was the year that her mother was dying of cancer.
And she was...
The only daughter still alive.
So I gather she'd been going through a lot of personal hell that I didn't know about.
So then I felt even more terrible that I never wrote her and told her how indebted I was to her and so forth and so on.
This got nothing to do with reading in a way.
What did she say?
You said she lost her cool.
Did she say something?
Oh, yes.
She threw that book at me.
She hit me in the forehead.
No!
She threw the book?
It was a slender book, fortunately.
I can imagine how she probably felt like going through the floor and didn't know what to say of the class.
She probably ignored the whole thing and went right on with her lectures.
But I never asked.
She told me to go sit down in Dean Town's office and stay there for the rest of the semester.
I think it was one of the reasons I dropped out of... My God.
Why was she so upset with the question?
That's not a... It wasn't the question.
It was the fact that she had thrown the book at me, I think.
She threw the book at you because you asked the students... I know, but you see, but then I was very... I mean, I had written... She had...
She was kind of distressed when she heard that some of us had gone to hear Carl Sandburg.
She wasn't much for a modern American.
But she went ahead and she read him, which he'd never done before, really, except a few of his poems, I guess.
Yeah, but you don't get mad at a student for going off to hear a poet.
I mean, this is almost anti-intellectual in a way.
Well, listen, I can't even bear to have you say that because, as I said, when I...
found out that that was the time that her mother was dying of cancer, which I did not know.
There was some explanation.
But I had, and I started to tell you we don't have time for the high school stories.
There's too much else to cover.
But that, she, I had tried her time after time after time.
And one of the things was around Carl Sandburg.
There we were, and it was, oh, God, that's right.
We were studying Keats' Lady of the Lake.
I mean, I was really obnoxious.
I mean, I was known in that high school for, I think it was, out of...
partly a certain kind of class pride.
Now, my brothers and sisters, I don't know how it was for my oldest sister, and she says she's forgotten practically everything about high school, but my baby brother, to this day, he can go on about what a cross it was for him to have to bear that I was his oldest sister.
He lived it down, I mean, and my youngest baby sister was so brilliant and got
all the top grades and got all the honors when she graduated and so forth and so on.
Why were you a cross to bear?
What?
Why were you such a cross to bear?
I was a cross to bear because this was, it was a certain period.
You behaved in your classes.
You had respect for your teachers.
And I was someone who was already outrageous in the very fact that, among other things, I mean, this has to do with, well, I wore...
That's somebody in my castoffs from our dean.
Though it was a flapper period, and I know why her mother
turned that particular dress over.
It was the flapper period.
I'm telling you ridiculous things that aren't very pertinent.
Well, you had what they call today an attitude.
You had an attitude problem, it sounds like.
I had an attitude, but I also combined it with a reverence.
I mean, if it was a class I loved and I got so much out of her classes, I mean, I owe her so much to this day.
and always will to my dying day.
So you dropped out of school?
Yes.
And was this to me?
Well, it was.
Well, it would have been my last year, but that was certainly, it was very, very terrible for me, because I told you I really revered her.
She really loved literature.
She was very closed, and I didn't tell you about Carl Sandburg, so here we are.
We're reading Lady in the Lake, which, by the way, was the worst thing, I think, to have, you know, to have someone read out of Keats, although we had some of those.
Is Keats write Lady in the Lake?
Yes.
Is it Keats?
Maybe it was.
Is that Keats, Lady in the Lake?
We'll check that out.
Yeah, well, I have to check that out.
It's strange that it makes me... Oh, no, who?
Shelley.
Not that Keats.
No, well, Keats died... He died 26 years old.
But, oh, how I loved Ode to the Nightingale.
I can recite it all to this day.
And, you know, and she taught many things that I loved at the same time that... I mean, she really formed my...
you know, and to give us De Quincey and have us write about prose rhythms.
I mean, this is... It's remarkable.
You're right.
This is high-level college stuff, which I didn't... She should have been teaching college lectures, which she should have been teaching.
Yes, absolutely.
I was an English major in college, and this sounds like college-level stuff.
Absolutely, absolutely.
Yes, which I didn't recognize until years later.
I started to tell you about my reading, so I'd better leave high school.
But the reading I began to do at that time, part of that... Now on your own.
Now you're reading totally on your own after you left high school.
Well, but it had to do also with my other reading background, which had to do that I went to the Socialist Sunday School, which had to do that there was a wonderful doctor, Dr. Jefferson,
who gave when he saw I was a reader, and he thought my dad would be interested.
My mother never learned to read English well, but my dad did, and my dad spoke very well, too.
copies of the Comrade, bound copies of the Comrade from the early 1900s when socialism was really international and all kinds of great names.
I still have those two volumes.
Really?
Yes.
Uh-huh, yeah.
If you want to take a look, I'll drag them out and you can look at them while I'm... But, you know, it's astonishing what and who you would find in them.
And I told you about the cry for justice.
So I was getting more than the classical canon already, plus the fact I early on became a member, ardent member of the Young Communist League, and I came to San Francisco.
And there were emigres from all the countries where...
Terrible governments had crushed democratic movements, which was what was happening in the 20s, including in Japan.
It's wonderful living in my neighborhood.
By the way, did you salute the red flag of China?
And a block down is the center street for Japantown.
Close street by the legendary one.
So when did you come to San Francisco?
About when?
Well, I came first in 1930.
I went back home.
Briefly, I was down in Kansas City.
Casey on the Kansas side, where I both worked in the slaughterhouses and where I was arrested for the second time and spent some time, actually, where I got pleurisy.
This is for political activities?
What?
Why did you get arrested?
Well, I got arrested.
I was passing out a leaflet that I... A political activity, so to speak.
Well, it was because I was passing out a leaflet about how you should join the union outside Cudahy's.
I was actually working at, was it Swift?
I don't even remember the exact... That's okay.
Well, it doesn't matter.
But anyhow, and then I came and I lived in Stockton for a while.
I had a little girl when I came back to California, my daughter Carla.
There were the two of us against the world, so to speak.
And I shan't talk about...
This is one of the books about me, but the only one in which I say things about... I can Xerox for you when I talk about what those seamen, what the seagoing guys and the emigres did for my knowledge of the... This is about Oh Yes.
What's the title of the book?
It's just called A Study of the Short Fiction.
But one of my pieces is called, Hey, Sailor, What's Ship?
And you see... Oh, sure.
This is a very important thing to know.
And you know how come B. Traven became a writer, too.
There you go.
That's right.
Okay, and this is published by whom?
Maybe I can find it.
Oh, it's published by a terrible publisher who's done nothing with it, and it's so much the best book about my work and the only book in which I also have my own, you know, say about my writing.
Really?
I'll try and get a copy of this.
I'm not sure if you'll have it at Harvard.
Yes, yes.
But...
And that page you just pointed out, I think it was page 151, I think.
Well, if you look, for instance, about Hayes Sailor, which is about those seamen.
But I came to a lot of literature, like Jose Rizal, you know who he is.
He was the hero of the Philippines.
He was executed before 1898.
It was when the Spanish took over the Philippines.
I think it was.
Maybe it was 1898.
And by the way, there were a marvelous group of writers, including Mark Twain, who... I'm listening.
who did everything they could to make known the horrible things that were happening there and that we were doing.
And somebody whose name I can't think of now, it had three, he had a middle name, an ode in a time of hesitation, wrote a poem, Are We the Eagle Nation?
Milton knew something, something about, you know, liberty and truth, or are we but the... Where was that published?
Oh, oh, oh, oh, this is, it's just an interview that some young kids in, um, was published in Lokator, which is their, they publish once a year, and it was in Joliet, Illinois, which is a working class.
But in this high school, they had these first generation of their family to really have good teachers who were interested that they read widely and so on.
This book was just published in 1995, apparently.
This is a pretty recent book.
That's the last of the books.
Wait a minute, I think there's been one book since.
There are six or seven books that concern my work.
I don't know which one of them is by... I was just called before you came with some good news, good news work.
for the family.
They went down in T. Deirdre 800, these two.
This was taken about three years before at McDowell Colony.
Constance Poiner, and she did one of the books about me.
It was really her dissertation.
I'll be able to find this.
Harvard will have it all.
Well, there's a, you know, like a book series, and
But I really love Joanne Fry's.
Good.
And it's recent, so it should be in print.
I'll be able to get it.
They're all in print.
They're all still in print.
I'm pretty sure what all of the other books do.
And Oxford just called me to say that they were going to put out Constance Coiner's book in paperback now.
And they asked for permission to use the pictures in it.
But that's about my, that's about Maradola Seur and me and about our having been reds.
Well, I want to tell you about, go back to reading, which is what, so I learned both from the seafaring guys I knew and from the emigres I got, and I was part of an international movement too.
I learned about riders.
who were not, who I'd never run across in the library, and some of whom were not.
And you take any of the recent anthologies, the top two shelves and all that stuff there are all anthologies that have some of my things in it, and there's more underneath there and more there.
And more in the back room.
There's a lot of anthologies, and I've been very interested in the changes in them in the years.
And, of course, the... By the Norton still is very... Well, it doesn't have, to use that scorn word, diversity, that so many of the other college anthologies...
do, although they always have something of mine, too.
But as a result of my very unacademic reading, not only libraries, though there were books I got from the library, sometimes an interlibrary loan that I learned about because of
those who I got to know who were here.
That's how come out.
Here being San Francisco.
What?
Here being San Francisco, you mean.
Well, that's right.
And are having, you know, we have much more of the world now, but anyhow, so did I learn about certain Chinese writers.
And so, for instance, when I heard accidentally that, to me, the great Ding Ling, she was originally published and everything I read as Ting Ling,
but I don't have time to talk, tell too much about the teachers that I had.
I mean, the literature.
But there came a time, it was 1971, December, and I had already, the Feminist Press had already been established, and I was able to, from the beginning, to suggest books to them so that they published a writer you've probably never heard of,
Somebody else whose education, although she did have a year in Arizona State Teachers College, Agnes Medley, who is the, well, she wrote a number of books, but an autobiography that just, she became such an important writer to me because it was the first book outside of, well,
Ruth Succo.
See, I'm beginning to talk to you about books.
There was something about farm life.
But anyhow, we should be talking about writers who...
or great beings or well-known beings who came out of, for instance, prison reading, you know, libraries.
That's important to have in your book.
I think so.
Because presumably, you know, this is pampering them.
Well, pampering them is by giving them books.
That's right.
Oh, all up and down in our terrible prison system here in most prisons in California.
It's all right to watch some TV, well, especially as that can be taken away from you if there's lockdown or something, and then you have nothing to do but in your crowded cell room, because there's no longer, do you have isolation unless you're down in the hole or in solitary.
Well, that's another subject, too.
Anyhow, but I have to tell you that it turned out that because these academics
who'd had good educations, the kind I had, although they also knew American literature, some American literature, were the classics.
I was asked to speak, among my other deaths of this year, is someone called Elaine Hedges, who is a professor at Tosin and who wrote several books.
But she thought to invite me
because she knew that I had told the feminist press about Daughter of Earth and about a book that, about what became famous in Charlotte Perkins Gilman and so forth and so on, and that I had quite a reading list.
And my class at Amherst, I didn't tell you about Amherst, 69, 69, 70,
I was asked out of the blue to come to Amherst to teach fiction.
And I said, I was in MacDowell Colony, I said, all right, I will come if I feel that it's a place where, you know, where I might be of some use, and I would like to teach.
But I said, frankly, you know, I don't know.
much about college.
I haven't had it myself.
Afterwards, I felt bitter that nobody thought to explain to me, you're supposed to have a syllabus, and you're supposed to have a reading list as well, an additional reading list, and you're supposed to order your books ahead of time, and you're supposed to have a title for your class.
ahead of time and all of these things.
But regardless, well, I went there and I went to, and I asked to go to a class that was not an English class.
I went to a sociology class, and it was the time they were beginning to take scholarship kids.
And there was this, they were discussing, is it Oscar Lewis who wrote a book about
Poor people, I've forgotten the name of the book.
There's something else I have to remember the name before you leave.
Anyhow, it was quite, you know, anyhow, one of the, one of these young men, it was an all-male college, stood up.